---
layout: events
style: archive
---

The Go compiler was originally written in C because 1) Go didn’t exist, 2) Go was unstable, and 3) Go was originally intended for writing network/systems code and not for compilers. But now 1) Go exists, 2) Go is stable as of Go 1.x, and 3) Go has turned out to be a nice general purpose language and the compiler won’t be an outsize influence on the language design.

They’re deciding to automatically convert the Go compiler written in C to Go, because writing from scratch would be too much hassle. To understand the challenges of automatically converting from C to Go, we must first look at the history of C and some of its idiosyncrasies.

## A History of C

Writen in 1972 at Bell Labs
“Quirky, flawed, and an enormous success” – Dennis Ritchie
The C Data Model

Original target hardware had 24KB memory
programmer in charge of memory(assembly)
type are there to help bu tnot enforced
dynamic storage is provided by library and mem management is burden on programmer
C conflates pointers with array types
C Control Flow

Similar to Go control flow primitives (e.g., do, while, for, switch)
C goto is similar to Go goto, but with some caveats.
C Program Model

Per-file compilation
Separate headers vs code
#define, #include
Challenges in converting C to Go

The goal is to convert *their* C code (not all C code). They want generated code to be human-readable and maintainable. They want automatic conversion to handle 99+% of code.

Unions

A Union is like a struct, but you’re only supposed to use one value (they all occupy the same space in memory). It’s up to the programmer to know which variable to use

There’s a joke in some of the original C code:
       #define struct union /* Great space saver */
This inspired a solution:
       #define union struct /* keeps code correct, just wastes some space */

#define

Can’t just expand during parsing. But in practice, there aren’t many #define’s in the Go compiler. So the solution is to extend the converter parser to handle special cases. Annotate some and rewrite others in existing code.

Comments

The converter records precise source locations and attaches comments to syntax immediately following the comment.

C Goto

In C, goto can’t jump beyond function boundaries. In Go, goto has more restrictions than C goto. In Go, a goto cannot jump over a variable definition (otherwise, you could see uninitialized memory). This has an easy automatic fix. In Go, you can’t jump into a new scope (curly-brace {} block). This is harder to fix.

There are currently 1032 goto statements in the Go compiler jumping to 241 labels. Russ breaks them down case by case. Turns out there are only a handful that require a manual rewrite. The others fall into more general categories to which auto-rewrite rules can be applied.

Note: There’s a book written about converting goto code to code without goto in general, but this is a sledgehammer and not necessary here.

Types and Type Mapping

In C, you can do implicit conversion between int, long, char, bool etc.
C pointers translate to Go pointers AND arrays. So the problem is converting C types that could map to multiple Go types.

The solution is to build a graph of “assigned” value flow, extract clusters of expressions around variables that should have the same type, and infer the correct variable type. This is like doing type inference applied to the special case of disambiguating between potentially ambiguous types in C (like pointer vs. array, int vs bool). For instance, if a function returns int and control flow analysis shows that the return value is always 0 or 1, you can infer that the type is actually bool.

State of the project

